Updated Inflation Documentation (#806)
NCAR/DART: guide/inflation.rst

Inflation
=========
Sampling errors and model errors are significant challenges that degrade the quality of the sample
background covariance matrix in the ensemble Kalman filter (EnKF). Sampling errors typically arise
from the use of a limited-size ensemble due to computational constraints. Conversely, model errors
and biases stem from deficiencies in model dynamics and uncertainties in physical parameters.
These issues can result in an underestimation of the true (and unknown) variance of the system.

Inflation is a common technique used to restore variability in the ensemble without altering its mean.
This is achieved by linearly scaling the ensemble perturbations (also known as anomalies or
departures from the mean) as follows:

	:math:`\widetilde{\mathbf{x}}_k^i = \sqrt{\lambda} \left( \mathbf{x}_k^i -
 	\overline{\mathbf{x}}_k \right) + \overline{\mathbf{x}}_k, \quad
	i = 1, 2, ..., N_e`

> 

Reviewer: Does the subscript 'k' serve any purpose here?  It's not defined and I wasn't sure if 'k' was the the same thing as 'e' the total ensemble members.

to vary dynamically in both space and time. These algorithms treat inflation
as a random variable characterized by a probability density function (PDF).
The mean (or mode) of the PDF is used as the inflation value, while the standard
deviation reflects the level of confidence in that value. In this way, the 

> inflation parameters (mean, standard deviation) are prognostic variables and

Author: I am going to omit the term 'prognostic variables'. This is typically used to describe a variable that the model predicts through integrating a physical equation. To me, a prognostic variable is a variable that has a partial derivative with respect to time in the model PDEs. Inflation mean and standard deviation is like a physical model parameter. I'll reword and push the change.

   methods. It is particularly useful especially in regions of state space that are not influenced by observations,
   either due to gaps in data availability or because they fall outside the localization range. To damp the inflation,
   the difference between the current inflation value and 1.0 is multiplied by this ``inf_damping`` value before
   the next assimilation cycle. So the inflation values are pushed towards 1.0, from above or below
   (if ``inf_lower_bound`` allows inflation values less than 1.0). A value of 0.0 turns all inflation off
   by forcing the inflation value to 1.0. A value of 1.0 turns damping off by leaving the original inflation
   value unchanged. We recommend setting the damping to a value of 0.9, which damps slowly.

	 .. note::
		 Order of (prior) inflation operations within DART:

		 - Inflation is read from file or namelist
		 - Inflation damping is applied: :math:`\sqrt{\lambda} \leftarrow 1 + \rho(\sqrt{\lambda} - 1),` where :math:`\rho` is the damping factor
		 - Damped Inflation is applied to the prior ensemble
		 - Inflation is updated with observations

> 		 - Updated inflation values are written out

Reviewer: I really like this order of operations. It emphasizes that the inflation damping and inflation estimation with observations are performed in series.  Could you maybe number the steps, because I think this would emphasize that the updated inflation values from step 5 (updated inflation is written out), are copied back into step 1 (Read in inflation from restart file).    Also instead of just saying Inflation is updated with observations in step 4, it would really help if it was stated Inflation is updated with observations **using inf_flavor algorithm**, or **using equation 1** which is defined at the beginning of the section.   Something that really distinguishes between the damping update versus the observation update.

                from being applied to a variable when inflation is turned on.  If a variable is
                not updated by observations because either 1) observation gaps exist in space or time 
                2)the state is outside the spatial localization distance, or  3) variable localization 
                was applied through the ``obs_impact_tool``, --the inflation update for that part of the
                state will revert to the inflation damping method, and inflation will still be applied 
                to all parts of the state space.

                DART does not allow for variable specific ``inf_damping`` settings thus if an immediate
                response time is required in the application of inflation, an alternative is to
                customize the ``input.nml`` to switch between ``UPDATE`` and ``NO_COPY_BACK`` as needed. 
                For an example discussing the impact of variable localization on inflation
                see `issue 777. <https://github.com/NCAR/DART/issues/777>`_

The suggested procedure for testing inflation:

1. Start without any inflation; i.e., ``inf_flavor = 0, 0`` and assess the performance. For a healthy ensemble

> DA system, one expects the prior RMSE and the total spread to be of the same order. We often use the ensemble

Reviewer: Shouldn't this say the RMSE and tot_spread should be roughly the same 'value' or 'magnitude'?  If you say they should be roughly the same 'order' this might suggest to me 'order of magnitude' which means even a 4-5x difference could be acceptable -- but I think we don't want the RMSE/tot_spread ratio being outside of 0.5 to 1.5 range.... correct?   Could you clarify this for me ?

Author: The term that is often used in the literature is 'order'. Overall, I think you want to avoid insanely large consistency values but sometimes 4-5x could actually be acceptable especially if it doesn't persist over long assimilation windows. So, I wouldn't be so stringent on the range of the ensemble consistency values. Clearly, a consistency of 1 is what we're after but this may not be even possible in systems where error growth is limited. Yet, I'm going to use the word 'magnitude' because it provides a better guidance for the users.

   to the ``inf_sd_lower_bound`` value effectively fixes the standard deviation at a constant value. To match the same
   behavior, if they are equal and flavor **5** is used it will also use that fixed value for the inflation
   standard deviation. Otherwise the standard deviation will adapt as needed during each assimilation cycle.

``&filter_nml :: inf_deterministic``
   *valid values:* ``.true.`` or ``.false.``

   Recommend always using ``.true.``.

Guidance Regarding Inflation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
First and foremost, if you are using one of the temporally-varying inflation options,
save the entire series of inflation files to explore how inflation evolves through time.
As part of the workflow, you have to take the output of one assimilation cycle and rename
it to be the input for the next assimilation cycle. That is the time to make a copy
that has a unique name - usually with some sort of date or timestamp. This also makes
it possible to restart an experiment. For many of the supported models, the scripting that
does the renaming and copying of the inflation files may already be provided.

.. Important::

> 		Inflation is only be applied to the variables that are **updated** by DART
> 		by specifying ``UPDATE`` within the ``&model_nml`` section of ``input.nml``.
> 		If the variables are not updated (``NO_COPY_BACK``), then inflation should
> 		not impact them. ``NO_COPY_BACK`` variables are often used to compute the forward
> 		operators, however, they don't take part in the update and as such
> 		they should not be inflated.
> 
> 		In order to make sure a variable with a ``NO_COPY_BACK`` tag is not inflated, the
> 		user needs to run ``fill_inflation_restart`` and assign an inflation value of 1
> 		to that variable. Additional details on how to run the ``fill_inflation_restart``
> 		program can be found in the "*Caution*" section below.

Reviewer 2: Suggest this to be clearer that users have to set inflation to 1 to get no inflation. 

```suggestion
		Inflation should only be applied to the variables that are **updated** by DART.	
		
		Some models have `NO_COPY_BACK`` variables which are often used to compute the forward
		operators, however they should not be inflated. Whether a variable is `NO_COPY_BACK`, or  `UPDATE`
		is set in the ``&model_nml``. 

		In order to make sure a variable with a ``NO_COPY_BACK`` tag is not inflated, the
		user needs to run ``fill_inflation_restart`` and assign an inflation value of 1
		to that variable. Additional details on how to run the ``fill_inflation_restart``
		program can be found in the "*Caution*" section below.
```

``&filter_nml :: inf_deterministic``
   *valid values:* ``.true.`` or ``.false.``

   Recommend always using ``.true.``.

Guidance Regarding Inflation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
First and foremost, if you are using one of the temporally-varying inflation options,
save the entire series of inflation files to explore how inflation evolves through time.
As part of the workflow, you have to take the output of one assimilation cycle and rename
it to be the input for the next assimilation cycle. That is the time to make a copy
that has a unique name - usually with some sort of date or timestamp. This also makes
it possible to restart an experiment. For many of the supported models, the scripting that
does the renaming and copying of the inflation files may already be provided.

.. Important::
		Inflation is only applied to the variables that are **updated** by DART
		by specifying ``UPDATE`` within the ``&model_nml`` section of ``input.nml``.
		Alternatively, if the variables are not updated (``NO_COPY_BACK``) then inflation
		will not impact them. ``NO_COPY_BACK`` variables are often used to compute the forward
		operators, however, they don't take part in the update and as such

> 		they will not be inflated.

Reviewer 2: @mgharamti @braczka 
A question on this 'important' section. 

NO_COPY_BACK does not prevent the variables being inflated, a user has to set the  initial inflation file to have inflation values of 1.0 to have have no inflation #276
Do you have code elsewhere that queries no_copy_back before applying inflation?

Author: Helen, I thought this feature has already been implemented after the science discussions we had. Perhaps, this is something I'll work on in a separate PR (in the near future). We will need to query the variables before applying inflation.
 
For the sake of this documentation PR, I'll edit the text for the `NO_COPY_BACK` section and push.

it to be the input for the next assimilation cycle. That is the time to make a copy
that has a unique name - usually with some sort of date or timestamp. This also makes
it possible to restart an experiment. For many of the supported models, the scripting that
does the renaming and copying of the inflation files may already be provided.

.. Important::
		Inflation is only applied to the variables that are **updated** by DART
                by specifying ``UPDATE`` within the ``&model_nml`` section of ``input.nml``.
		Alternatively, if the variables are not updated (``NO_COPY_BACK``) then inflation
		will not impact them. ``NO_COPY_BACK`` variables are often used to compute the forward
		operators, however, they don't take part in the update and as such
		they will not be inflated.

                Assigning a variable as ``NO_COPY_BACK`` is the **only way** to prevent inflation
                from being applied to a variable when inflation is turned on.  If a variable is
                not updated by observations because either 1) observation gaps exist in space or time 
                2)the state is outside the spatial localization distance, or  3) variable localization 

>                 was applied through the ``obs_impact_tool``, --the inflation update for that part of the

Author: inflation damping happens whether inflation was updated with observations or not. I am not a fan of the word 'revert', I'll edit the text.

Author: I'm on it. I realize that I needed more clarity so I added a note detailing the order of inflation operations in DART. Will push shortly
